docs/api.md, before:

Go API
======
[![API Document][api-badge]][apidoc]

This document describes how to use [actionlint](..) as Go library.

actionlint can be used from Go programs. See [the documentation][apidoc] to know the list of all APIs. It contains
a workflow file parser built on top of `go-yaml/yaml`, expression `${{ }}` lexer/parser/checker, etc.

Followings are unexhaustive list of interesting APIs.

- `Command` struct represents entire `actionlint` command. `Command.Main` takes command line arguments and runs command
  until the end and returns exit status.
- `Linter` manages linter lifecycle and applies checks to given files. If you want to run actionlint checks in your
  program, please use this struct.
- `Project` and `Projects` detect a project (Git repository) in a given directory path and find configuration in it.
- `Config` represents structure of `actionlint.yaml` config file. It can be decoded by [go-yaml/yaml][go-yaml] library.
- `Workflow`, `Job`, `Step`, ... are nodes of workflow syntax tree. `Workflow` is a root node.
- `Parse()` parses given contents into a workflow syntax tree. It tries to find syntax errors as much as possible and
  returns found errors as slice.
- `Pass` is a visitor to traverse a workflow syntax tree. Multiple passes can be applied at single pass using `Visitor`.
- `Rule` is an interface for rule checkers and `RuneBase` is a base struct to implement a rule checker.
  - `RuleExpression` is a rule checker to check expression syntax in `${{ }}`.
  - `RuleShellcheck` is a rule checker to apply `shellcheck` command to `run:` sections and collect errors from it.
  - `RuleJobNeeds` is a rule checker to check dependencies in `needs:` section. It can detect cyclic dependencies.
  - ...
- `ExprLexer` lexes expression syntax in `${{ }}` and returns slice of `Token`.
- `ExprParser` parses given slice of `Token` and returns syntax tree for expression in `${{ }}`. `ExprNode` is an
  interface for nodes in the expression syntax tree.
- `ExprType` is an interface of types in expression syntax `${{ }}`. `ObjectType`, `ArrayType`, `StringType`,
  `NumberType`, ... are structs to represent actual types of expression.
- `ExprSemanticsChecker` checks semantics of expression syntax `${{ }}`. It traverses given expression syntax tree and
  deduces its type, checking types and resolving variables (contexts).
- `ValidateRefGlob()` and `ValidatePathGlob()` validate [glob filter pattern][filter-pattern-doc] and returns all errors
  found by the validator.
- `ActionMetadata` is a struct for action metadata file (`action.yml`). It is used to check inputs specified at `with:`
  and typing `steps.{id}.outputs` object strictly.
- `PopularActions` global variable is data set of popular actions' metadata collected by [the script](../scripts/generate-popular-actions).

Note that the version of this repository is for command line tool `actionlint`. So it does not represent version of the
library. It means that patch version bump may introduce some breaking changes.

---

[Checks](checks.md) | [Installation](install.md) | [Usage](usage.md) | [Configuration](config.md) | [References](reference.md)

[api-badge]: https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/rhysd/actionlint.svg
[apidoc]: https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/rhysd/actionlint
[go-yaml]: https://github.com/go-yaml/yaml
[filter-pattern-doc]: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#filter-pattern-cheat-sheet

Commit message:

clarify library versioning and Go version compatibility in document

docs/api.md, after:

Go API
======
[![API Document][api-badge]][apidoc]

This document describes how to use [actionlint](..) as Go library.

actionlint can be used from Go programs. See [the documentation][apidoc] to know the list of all APIs. It contains
a workflow file parser built on top of `go-yaml/yaml`, expression `${{ }}` lexer/parser/checker, etc.

Followings are unexhaustive list of interesting APIs.

- `Command` struct represents entire `actionlint` command. `Command.Main` takes command line arguments and runs command
  until the end and returns exit status.
- `Linter` manages linter lifecycle and applies checks to given files. If you want to run actionlint checks in your
  program, please use this struct.
- `Project` and `Projects` detect a project (Git repository) in a given directory path and find configuration in it.
- `Config` represents structure of `actionlint.yaml` config file. It can be decoded by [go-yaml/yaml][go-yaml] library.
- `Workflow`, `Job`, `Step`, ... are nodes of workflow syntax tree. `Workflow` is a root node.
- `Parse()` parses given contents into a workflow syntax tree. It tries to find syntax errors as much as possible and
  returns found errors as slice.
- `Pass` is a visitor to traverse a workflow syntax tree. Multiple passes can be applied at single pass using `Visitor`.
- `Rule` is an interface for rule checkers and `RuneBase` is a base struct to implement a rule checker.
  - `RuleExpression` is a rule checker to check expression syntax in `${{ }}`.
  - `RuleShellcheck` is a rule checker to apply `shellcheck` command to `run:` sections and collect errors from it.
  - `RuleJobNeeds` is a rule checker to check dependencies in `needs:` section. It can detect cyclic dependencies.
  - ...
- `ExprLexer` lexes expression syntax in `${{ }}` and returns slice of `Token`.
- `ExprParser` parses given slice of `Token` and returns syntax tree for expression in `${{ }}`. `ExprNode` is an
  interface for nodes in the expression syntax tree.
- `ExprType` is an interface of types in expression syntax `${{ }}`. `ObjectType`, `ArrayType`, `StringType`,
  `NumberType`, ... are structs to represent actual types of expression.
- `ExprSemanticsChecker` checks semantics of expression syntax `${{ }}`. It traverses given expression syntax tree and
  deduces its type, checking types and resolving variables (contexts).
- `ValidateRefGlob()` and `ValidatePathGlob()` validate [glob filter pattern][filter-pattern-doc] and returns all errors
  found by the validator.
- `ActionMetadata` is a struct for action metadata file (`action.yml`). It is used to check inputs specified at `with:`
  and typing `steps.{id}.outputs` object strictly.
- `PopularActions` global variable is the data set of popular actions' metadata collected by [the script](../scripts/generate-popular-actions).
- `AllWebhookTypes` global variable is the mapping from all webhook names to their types collected by [the scirpt](../scripts/generate-webhook-events).
- `WorkflowKeyAvailability()` returns available context names and special function names for the given workflow key like
  `jobs.<job_id>.outputs.<output_id>`. This function uses the data collected by [the scirpt](../scripts/generate-availability).

## Library versioning

The version of this repository is for command line tool `actionlint`. So it does not represent the version of the library.
It means that the library does not follow sematinc versioning and any patch version bump may introduce some breaking changes.

## Go version compatibility

Minimum supported Go version is written in [`go.mod`](../go.mod) file in this repository. That said, older Go versions are
actually not tested on CI. Last two major Go versions are recommended because they're tested on CI. For example, when the latest
Go version is v1.22, v1.21 and v1.22 are nice to use.

---

[Checks](checks.md) | [Installation](install.md) | [Usage](usage.md) | [Configuration](config.md) | [References](reference.md)

[api-badge]: https://pkg.go.dev/badge/github.com/rhysd/actionlint.svg
[apidoc]: https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/rhysd/actionlint
[go-yaml]: https://github.com/go-yaml/yaml
[filter-pattern-doc]: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#filter-pattern-cheat-sheet
